Hi.
This is a video about veganism and the problem
of leadership.
If veganism were just a diet, it wouldn't
have leadership, and it wouldn't have problems
of leadership.
If veganism were just a diet, it wouldn't
be discredited by bad leadership.
A recent example of the importance of leadership
(and if you don't know what I'm talking about,
or you're watching this 10 years in the future,
don't worry, you don't have to know any of
the particular people I mention here to understand
the issues I'm going to be exploring in this
video)… a recent example was the (sort-of)
rise and fall of Gary Yourofsky.
Gary Yourofsky was a guy who came to prominence
through videos he posted on the internet,
he went on to provide interviews on television,
and his fame reflected the intense desire
among many vegans to have a leader.
His leadership was, in effect, created by
pent-up followership.
Now the recent problem has been that Gary
Yourofsky, although he was just a leader on
this issue (on the question of ethical veganism,
being vegan for ethical reasons, for ecological
reasons and so on), he managed to discredit
himself --to some extent-- by making insensitive
and vaguely racist-sounding comments about
Palestinians and other ethnic groups.
Now, from his perspective, he's tried to clear
that up by reiterating that he's prejudiced
against all people equally, that he doesn't
have any particular prejudice against Palestinians,
but the fact that this is an issue at all
reflects the fundamental desire of vegans
to have leaders, and the expectation that
those leaders will be real, political leaders,
comparable to any politician leading a political
party, or, you could say, a religious leader.
Why should Gary Yourofsky have a "correct"
or "sensitive" perspective on the Palestinian
civil war?
Well, I live in Canada: why would the leaders
of any of our political parties know anything
about the Palestinian civil war?
I think, honestly, most political leaders
in Canada know nothing (I think they're largely
completely ignorant of politics outside of
Canada), but there's an expectation of them
that they will consistently make sensitive,
accurate statements about Palestine and numerous
other conflicts around the world.
Actually, given my background it is somewhat
hilarious to me [that] every so often somebody
from the Canadian government has to make a
statement about Myanmar (also known as Burma);
we have nobody in the government of Canada
who knows anything about Southeast Asia or
Myanmar in particular, so it is always embarrassing
when somebody has to step forward and make
a statement of that kind.
Arright, getting off topic.
The problem of leadership is created by the
desires of the followership.
Gary Yourofsky would be completely within
his rights to say, "Hey, I didn't ask for
this."
Hypothetically, if Gary Yourofsky was a bigot,
if Gary Yourofsky really held tremendously
offensive views about Palestinians, he would
be entitled to say, "Hey, [my] public message
is just about veganism and [I] shouldn't be
judged for [my] views on the Israel-Palestine
conflict."
He can say that, and, obviously, that will
narrow the significance of his leadership
tremendously; he'll become just a fringe leader
of a fringe diet of no greater significance.
But the whole public interest in Gary Yourofsky,
the intensity of the yearning of vegans to
have a public figure speaking for them (clearly
and unambiguously), reflects a broader political
dynamic.
Likewise, people like Durianrider and Freelee,
they're within their rights to say they didn't
ask to play a broader political role: they
sell books on how to lose weight, books on
how to have a healthy diet, they make videos
encouraging people to exercise, and they could
say for themselves [that] they're not the
leaders of a political party, they shouldn't
be held to a standard that requires them to
be politically-correct or well-informed on
any other issue (aside from veganism narrowly
defined as a diet).
But at the same time we all know that veganism
has aspirations "to change the world", "to
save the world", "to save the animals".
It has a political mandate that's much grander
than just a diet.
And that includes, of course, ecological concerns.
Now, why are these people (people like Gary
Yourofsky, Freelee, Durianrider), why are
they thrust into this strange leadership role
when they didn't ask for it?
I think one of the most important points to
recognize is the failure of other institutions
who could have (and should have) played that
leadership role for veganism.
I live in Canada.
I was involved in the Green Party of Canada
maybe starting in 1998/1999.
Imagine what a different world it would be
if an organization like the Green Party had
played a clear leadership role in veganism
starting in (let's say) 1995.
Things would be different.
Things would be different for vegans in Canada,
things would be different for ecology in Canada,
and, although at the beginning (back in the
1990s) a lot of people would have said, "Oh
the Green Party is crazy!
They say everyone should have this vegan diet!",
reciprocal with that, the Green Party would
have built a constituency of really serious
vegans who really supported that party, really
cared about ecology and so on.
Now, instead, the Green Party of Canada (like
a lot of other Green Parties and ecological
movements around the world) has made bullshit
excuses and taken a half-way position and
so on.
So, they've neither had the benefits nor the
drawbacks of taking a clear stand on veganism
over a long period of time.
Another comparison that's not limited to one
country is Greenpeace.
Greenpeace is not the same as the Green Party,
but Greenpeace has a unique history linked
to Canada, several of the founding members
(the most important founders) were Canadian
and so on.
The world would be a different place if Greenpeace
had been unambiguously committed to veganism
from an early date (from 1985, let's say,
instead of 1995).
Again, a lot of people who supported Greenpeace
would have felt challenged by that: people
who ate meat and cared about ecology would
have felt challenged back in the 1980s and
1990s.
"Oh, these ecologists, they don't just do
public stunts, hanging banners from a boat
and saying they want to save the environment,
they also say that everyone should stop drinking
milk and eating cheese."
"Oh, okay…"
That would have been challenging, but it would
also mean that today (in 2015) an organization
like Greenpeace would have spokespeople who
were more famous and influential amongst vegans
than Gary Yourofsky.
It would mean that Greenpeace would have opinions
and publications and a news-service that mattered
more to vegans than videos put on the internet
by Gary Yourofsky, Durianrider, Freelee or
any other example you want to name.
And they don't.
They failed.
Those organizations, organizations like Greenpeace,
had the opportunity (the greatest opportunity
in the world) to play that kind of leadership
role for veganism, and they either didn't
want it, or they botched it, and bungled it,
and they failed.
I would argue that People for the Ethical
Treatment of Animals (P.E.T.A.), I would argue
that they're also a failure.
Maybe that's a more complicated case-study
to get into, and…
I knew a guy who was employed by P.E.T.A.
for several years, so, just to keep this video
short I'm not going to speak on that now.
Probably somebody who lives in the U.S., and
has years of experience with P.E.T.A., they
should make that video; it is not really my
story to tell.
I met and spoke for a couple of hours with
one of the founders of Greenpeace, and, again,
Greenpeace, their presence in Canada is really
different from any other country, so…
I feel a little bit better-informed and more
connected to that history.
And, god, that guy I met, one of the founders
at Greenpeace, one of its leaders and most
influential voices for ecology in Canada,
in his whole life he never even tried to be
vegetarian, let alone vegan.
[He] never stopped wearing leather shoes and
I don't think he quit smoking cigarettes or
drinking alcohol either, not to my knowledge.
Ugh.
Painful.
And, y'know, he was a lifelong preacher and
activist for ecology.
So there's a missed opportunity there, and
the fact that one institution misses that
opportunity creates a kind of pent up followership
(a demand for leadership) that can latch on
to people like Gary Yourofsky, Freelee and
Durianrider, whether or not those people ever
wanted to take on such a leadership role.
I could end the video there.
Maybe I should end the video there, ten minutes
is long enough, huh?
I think the other warning I want to mention
here is just that success in one place will
prevent success in another: one opportunity
that creates an institution will take away
other opportunities.
If you live in a country the size of Canada
and the leader of the Green Party happens
to be a fruitcake, just happens to be somebody
who is not very intelligent or who you disagree
with, you don't have the option of saying,
"Okay, I'm going to vote for that other Green
Party".
No, there's only one.
Y'know there's only institution, I think,
globally, like Greenpeace.
There's definitely only one institution in
Canada like Greenpeace.
Although you can argue that --in theory--
there could be an infinite number of political
parties, there could be an infinite number
of those ecological charities, in reality
there's one Greenpeace, and that's the one
institution my grandmother used to donate
money to.
There's a limited number of opportunities
for a limited number of people to get that
kind of message out.
And that's why people feel such a sense of
disappointment if a guy like Gary Yourofsky
comes into the limelight and then discredits
himself.
I'm going to briefly mention my experience
connected to Buddhism in Canada.
Y'know we had Buddhist institutions and it
just so happened that the people in charge
of them were fruitcakes, were bad people,
were crazy or incompetent, or whatever you
want to say.
You can't turn around and say, "Oh well, there
are plenty of other opportunities!"
No, those failures (individual failures and
institutional failures), those did discredit
Buddhism in Canada.
Those had long-term consequences, and it is
deeply embarrassing, and then you've just
got to deal with the consequences and move
on.
For me, personally, it is kind of hilarious
to talk about those examples, but I don't
know how interesting it would be to vegans
watching this video.
We had one guy in Toronto who was at best
very eccentric, at worst insane; he did lie
to people, I wouldn't call him a scam-artist
or anything like that, but he was dishonest
in his practices; and he managed to set up
an institution right on the edge of the University
of Toronto that was proclaiming itself as
a kind of academically valid Buddhist institution.
So, not just religious, but allegedly doing
real research, and providing language classes
and other functions.
Of course it sounds great on paper.
If it is a failure, if it is a fraud, if people
donate money to it and then feel ripped off,
if the guy in charge turns out to be wildly
eccentric, that has consequences.
And, again, you can say in theory, "Oh, well,
you can have ten different institutions like
this!
Anyone can start up a new charity tomorrow
and do it!"
Yeah, anyone can start up another Greenpeace,
anyone can start up another Green Party.
It's not true and, on the contrary, you've
got to deal with the long shadow of that institutional
failure.
Within universities if just one professor
is crazy and discredits his department, or
discredits his discipline, it has a long shadow,
you know.
So these are the dangers of thrusting people
into a position of leadership.
And, look, okay, I see this happen again and
again: a certain type of personality is drawn
to the limelight.
I was involved in the theater when I was a
teenager, when I was better-looking than I
am now, and when I was stupider than I am
now, let me just say.
And, y'know, back then, everyone knew that
a certain type of personality was drawn to
be on stage and was motivated to stick with
it.
It is one thing to just do stand-up comedy
for a couple of weekends or once-in-a-while,
but it is another thing to be motivated to
go back again and again.
A certain type of personality has the self-confidence
and the self-discipline to get up on stage
and perform, but at the same time has the
vulnerability to really want the approval
of the crowd, to need the cheering of the
crowd, or the applause, or the laughter.
To really be gratified by that [takes] a certain
type of personality.
And very often people who are stand-up comedians
[and] successful actors, people who have that
combination [of traits], very often they're
involved with drugs, just as a psychological
type, just as a pattern.
Many people have remarked on this; this is
not something new that has just come out of
nowhere in this video.
Durianrider, by his own words, a former long-time
drug user; he hasn't called himself a drug
addict, but he's said that he used every type
of drug under the sun, he's used every drug
that's out there, he's remarked that he's
been in-and-out of prison, somehow related
to his drugs.
I don't know his criminal charges.
I appreciate his honesty: it's great, and
it's wonderful that he turned his life around.
It's wonderful that he went from being a drug
user and ex-convict to being a vegan and a
fitness guru.
I'm happy for him.
Freelee, in this kind of vegan leadership
role, when she started out her main act was
to say to the audience really honestly that
she was a former drug addict, she would refer
to herself as a drug addict, having this long
history with drug use that included cocaine
but also a lot of marijuana, ecstasy and this
kind of thing.
I appreciate her honesty and it is wonderful
that she turned her life around.
That's great.
And both of those guys, they have that personality:
they have a certain kind of reckless self-confidence,
but at the same time there's this terrible
vulnerability, where they need your approval
and you can see it gets to them, it hurts
them so much, certain types of rejection,
or people disagreeing with them or questioning
them.
It's like a lot of actors, a lot of stand-up
comics.
I'm not faulting them, but they're put into
a leadership role that (in some ways) they
didn't ask for, y'know.
They're just out there selling diet books
and encouraging you to get on your bicycle
and, y'know, like Gary Yourofsky, what if
they happen to make some politically-incorrect
statement, some offensive statement, about
aboriginal people, about indigenous people
in Australia for example?
Would it matter?
It would because our expectations of them,
in this leadership role, really are closer
to a political leader or a religious leader
than they are just somebody promoting a diet.
They're promoting an ecological cause.
They're asking you to save the world.
They're promoting a moral and ethical cause.
They're asking you to reduce animal suffering.
Those things go way beyond just being a diet
and fitness guru, even though they may have
never asked for that kind of responsibility.
And I see the same pattern repeating itself:
who chooses themselves for this role, who
puts themselves on stage, who takes on that
kind of leadership.
There's a new guy called The Vegan Cheetah.
I totally appreciate his honesty: he's a former
drug addict, former convict, and he did talk
about the charges.
He committed non-trivial crimes and he's been
in and out of halfway houses and so on.
So, former drug-addict, criminal charges,
he's now turned his life around, he's become
vegan, he's become very serious about weight-lifting,
he shows off his body, that's great.
If he were my own brother, or if he were a
friend of mine from high-school, who had that
kind of background (ex-convict, former drug
habit, etc.), I would be so happy for him,
that he turned his life around.
But this guy could never get elected as a
small town mayor, because those questions
are always there: what have you done with
your life, and what haven't you done with
your life?
To mention one more example there's a guy
who started a channel called The Glucose Network,
and he just dropped out of university, he
says it's his fifth time, y'know.
And, look, man, he brags about it, with a
certain kind of bravado (his name's Abdullah,
dropped out of university for his fifth time,
and he wants to be macho and act like it's
not a failure), man, my heart breaks for you.
You can't get a B.A. and your parents have
obviously paid money repeatedly to put you
into university, man, I feel bad for you.
And those questions are going to haunt you
for the rest of your life.
I just use a small-town mayor as an example
but, obviously, for people like Harley and
Freelee, the questions are always going to
surround them: okay, so this is your background,
you used to have an eating disorder, you used
to be a drug addict, you used to be a convict,
but now, now that you have some money, you
have a public profile, you're selling diet
books, now why don't you go back to university
and get a diploma as a nutritionist?
If you're running for a small-town major,
people ask about what you did with your life,
and what you didn't do with your life.
You don't need a PhD, you don't even need
a B.A., y'know.
If you've just been running, like, a corner
store, in a town, if you've just been an honest
businessman running a small business, you
can run for mayor.
But you've got to be able to stand up there
with pride and give an account of what you
did with your life, of what matters to you,
to take on that leadership role.
Naturally, what's going on now in veganism,
because of the failure of institutions like
the Green Party (no matter what country you're
in, the Green Party in Germany, the Green
Party in Canada, the United States, wherever
we're talking about), the process we've got
going on is much more like people stepping
forward to become stand-up comedians and then
a followership latches on to them, expecting
so much more.
And they may not have asked for those expectations.
And the parts don't quite fit.